---
title: "MSAGPT: Neural Prompting Protein Structure Prediction via MSA Generative Pre-Training"
collection: publications
status: published
category: conferences
permalink: /publication/2024-09-26-MSAGPT
excerpt: 'Employing a 2D evolutionary positional encoding scheme and learning from AlphaFold2 Feedback, MSAGPT generates constructive virtual MSA that enables accurate protein structure predictions in situations where natural co-evolutionary information is scarce.'
date: 2024-09-26
venue: 'NeurIPS'
# slidesurl: 'http://zhileibei.github.io/files/MSAGPT_slides.pdf'
# paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.05347'
paperurl: 'https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/41f3347f8f47c17bbadaed584e68d8bd-Paper-Conference.pdf'
citation: 'Bo Chen*, Zhilei Bei*, Xingyi Cheng, Pan Li, Jie Tang, Le Song. &quot;MSAGPT: Neural Prompting Protein Structure Prediction via MSA Generative Pre-Training.&quot; In <i>NeurIPS</i> (2024).'

---

Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA) plays a pivotal role in unveiling the evolutionary trajectories of protein families. The accuracy of protein structure predictions is often compromised for protein sequences that lack sufficient homologous information to construct high-quality MSA. Although various methods have been proposed to generate virtual MSA under these conditions, they fall short in comprehensively capturing the intricate co-evolutionary patterns within MSA or require guidance from external oracle models. Here we introduce MSAGPT, a novel approach to prompt protein structure predictions via MSA generative pre-training in the low-MSA regime. MSAGPT employs a simple yet effective 2D evolutionary positional encoding scheme to model the complex evolutionary patterns. Endowed by this, its flexible 1D MSA decoding framework facilitates zero- or few-shot learning. Moreover, we demonstrate that leveraging the feedback from AlphaFold2 can further enhance the model’s capacity via Rejective Fine-tuning (RFT) and Reinforcement Learning from AF2 Feedback (RLAF). Extensive experiments confirm the efficacy of MSAGPT in generating faithful virtual MSA to enhance the structure prediction accuracy (up to +8.5% TM-Score on few-shot scenarios). The transfer learning capabilities also highlight its great potential for facilitating other protein tasks.
